we have two names actually one is polo I
pull the water origin the Maya and the
Maya means it's a it's a specific place
in the ocean it's a navigational
landmark in the ocean and then finally
which is a word that that Ray came up
with meaning to demonstrate or to show
into war I hope that would be the name
of the carving team that car become did
we start the process last year beginning
of August August then it was completed
when August 6th of this year and you
know the bottom line I think for us is
practicing and then teaching I guess the
perpetuation of the of the tradition
that's really the goal and to do that
any way we can if I started in 1982-83
with at that time are one of the last
practicing canoe builders whose name was
pencil and applause and around that same
time period I went to the island of
Palawan which is in the western
Carolinas and they still really keep
their canoe culture intact as far as the
navigation saline as a way of life for
them and it's been a long road in it and
there's still a long way to go but Ray
Ray's learned a lot that's basically
where it started so you've been
practicing a long time
then Rey has been learning from from
myself and and also most recently from a
gentleman named Ryan M Edward who is a
master builder from Poland we led the
carving of this particular canoe that
that we know recently that was finished
on August 6 on this guy named the booth
at their muscle from Palau I introduced
this to over he heard about our goals we
wanted to do in our lack of building
materials so you introduced us to Maddux
ogle from rota and he have flew us over
there and we met with them and yet took
us to his property and showed us you
know where the trees rat and he let us
get whatever we needed wood in rodas
it's just right there and on the side of
the road and a lot of that goodness it's
already dead you know it's been falling
down oh there was we had we had a funder
the the organization is called the
tourism Education Council and they
actually funded our trip over to rota
and materials were brought back free of
charge by a sea bridge corporation which
is a transporter and they do a lot of
transportation of goods up to the
northern marianas so on the way back
they didn't have any no there's no goods
to import to Guam from the Northern
Marianas so they had excess space on one
of their barges we were able through the
help of the tourism Education Council to
get the wood shipped back free of charge
and also mannix he didn't accept any
money for the for he wouldn't accept any
money for the wood he just wanted to
give it to us so basically our our our
our project was in part sponsored by the
tourism education
ray is the only apprentice that we've
had and the other guys are all from pull
up a lot of the skilled Carver's and our
builder so array and myself or
indigenous to from Guam adzes is the
primary tool and that you know if you're
skilled with that tool that you can and
you can produce a lot of very subtle and
specific lines that make the canoe
perform well when you're when you're
under sail but we use modern tools as
well just to speed the process of
Longley because that helps them in the
mold removal of a lot of wood that you
don't need and you can do things more
quickly so we're not completely
traditional the size of the canoe can
vary depending on the materials
available and you can get a really big
piece of wood and you know not all of
the wood is usable and the builders will
usually have all of that in their head
and once they see the piece of wood they
get the size of the keel measure the
keel the wood that's good for the keel
and then there's there's formula spec
tights it's all in their head
let's pass down from thousands of years
of canoe building and you know you you
have to formulate your plan on building
the canoe according to your materials
available and traditionally the canoes
are composites so you have a single kill
but separate file pieces and like reset
all of that is of the builders head and
so he conforms to the materials rather
than the other way around because you
can't always and it was a good point he
made you can always find the materials
that are going to be ideal you the size
of our canoe which is 22 feet is
actually not used for open ocean sailing
not any long long distances but our
immediate plan is to when when the
conditions are right to sail it up to
Roda
we would like to do that we have to wait
for the right conditions and
we really want to take it there so that
Manik so go and the family that gave us
the the wood can see it because we said
if we can and it's Bosco will bring the
canoe back so you can see what we get
it's still a learning process even for
me you know I've done a lot of sailing
but especially when we sail with the
guys from kilowatt I'm even learning
certain techniques and I either for God
or never experienced normally so for ray
and I were still students and learning
them but you know we've learned a lot
together during this project I was
telling ray I said you know I don't call
myself a master builder know certain
things but I'm even me I'm still
learning Gus is really the perpetuation
of everything and you know and all is
said and done we're really only going to
know if we were successful with somebody
else and I was like Ray or maybe his son
they can get a group of people together
and are skilled enough to put something
together themselves and also pass down
those skills so that that part of the
mission and the reconstruction really
remains to be seen